www.osha.gov
OSHA 3185-09N 2003
Saving Sudden Cardiac
Arrest Victims in
the Workplace
Automated External Defibrillators
Improving survival from sudden cardiac arrest.
There are 220,000 victims of sudden cardiac arrest
per year in the United States; about 10,000 sudden
cardiac arrests occur at work.
Waiting for the arrival of emergency medical system
personnel results in only 5-7% survival.
Studies with immediate defibrillation have shown up
to 60% survival one year after sudden cardiac arrest.
Automated external defibrillators
An automated external defibrillator (AED) is a
medical device designed to analyze the heart rhythm
and deliver an electric shock to victims of ventricular
fibrillation to restore the heart rhythm to normal.
Ventricular fibrillation is the uncoordinated heart
rhythm most often responsible for sudden
cardiac arrest.
Sudden cardiac arrest
Sudden cardiac arrest occurs when ventricular
fibrillation takes place or when the heart stops
beating altogether. Without medical attention, the
victim collapses, loses consciousness, becomes
unresponsive, and dies. Many victims have no
prior history of heart disease and are stricken
without warning.
Causes of sudden cardiac arrest
• Heart attack
• Electrocution
• Asphyxiation (loss of consciousness and death
caused by inadequate oxygen in the work
environment, such as in a confined space).
Reasons for AEDs in the workplace
• Workers may suffer sudden cardiac arrest while
on the job.
• Onsite AEDs save precious treatment time, and
can improve survival odds because they can be
used before emergency medical service (EMS)
personnel arrive.
• A heart rhythm in ventricular fibrillation may only
be restored to normal by an electric shock.
• The AED is compact, lightweight, portable, battery
operated, safe, and easy to use.
Placement of AEDs
• AEDs should be conveniently installed to ensure
response within 3-5 minutes.
• Areas where many people work closely together,
such as assembly lines and office buildings.
• Close to a confined space.
• Areas where electric-powered devices are used.
• Outdoor worksites where lightning may occur.
• Health units where workers may seek treatment
for heart attack symptoms.
• Company fitness units and cafeterias.
• Remote sites, such as off-shore drilling rigs,
construction projects, marine vessels, power
transmission lines, and energy pipe lines.
AED program cost
AEDs cost $1200-$3000 per device.
Training, annual retraining, and administrative costs
are additional.
AED training
Your workers can easily be trained to:
• Recognize sudden cardiac arrest and notify
EMS personnel,
• Perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR),
• Provide early defibrillation with an AED, and
• Care for the victim until EMS personnel arrive.
For more information, visit the OSHA website at
www.osha.gov or the websites of the following
organizations:
• American Heart Association
• American College of Occupational and
Environmental Medicine
• American Red Cross
• Federal Occupational Health
• National Center for Early Defibrillation
• National Safety Council
SUCCESS STORIES
From the American Heart Association
• A 41-year-old worker at a manufacturer of heating
and air-conditioning systems suffered a sudden
cardiac arrest at work. After three shocks and CPR
he was revived within 4 minutes. Fortunately, his
company had AEDs and trained responders. By
the time EMS personnel arrived, he had been
resuscitated and was moved to a hospital. The
employee survived.
• A 62-year-old employee of a coatings, glass, and
chemical manufacturer suffered a sudden cardiac
arrest after walking up the stairs to her office.
Employees in the next office heard her fall and
notified the plant emergency response team. She
was defibrillated and saved in less than 2 minutes.
EMS personnel then arrived to transport her to the
hospital. She sent a note to the company after her
discharge from the hospital saying she had "no
doubt that headquarters spent money wisely."
• An employee at an automobile manufacturer was
working on the production line when he suddenly
collapsed, lost consciousness, and stopped breathing.
Plant security responded, and after two shocks with
an AED, the employee’s heart responded and his
pulse returned. He’s alive today thanks to the fast
actions of his co-workers and the company’s
emergency response plan, which included AED
installation and training.
From the National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health
• While standing on a fire escape during a building
renovation, a 30-year-old construction worker was
holding a metal pipe with both hands. The pipe
contacted a high voltage line, and the worker instantly
collapsed. About 4 minutes later, a rescue squad
arrived and began CPR. Within 6 minutes the squad
had defibrillated the worker. His heartbeat returned to
normal and he was transported to a hospital. The
worker regained consciousness and was discharged
from the hospital within 2 weeks.
AEDS SAVE LIVES!
These devices have a proven track record of saving
lives in public places as well as in the workplace.
They can do the same for you and your employees.
Please consider installing AEDs in your workplace.
This informational booklet provides a general overview of a
particular topic related to OSHA standards. It does not alter
or determine compliance responsibilities in OSHA standards
or the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970. Because
interpretations and enforcement policy may change over
time, you should consult current OSHA administrative
interpretations and decisions by the Occupational Safety
and Health Review Commission and the Courts for
additional guidance on OSHA compliance requirements.
This publication is in the public domain and may be
reproduced, fully or partially, without permission.
Source credit is requested but not required.
This information is available to sensory impaired individuals
upon request. Voice phone: (202) 693-1999;
teletypewriter (TTY) number: (877) 889-5627.