What types of machine components are
hazardous?
The following types of mechanical components
present amputation hazards:
• Point of operation – the area of a machine
where it performs work on material.
• Power-transmission apparatuses – flywheels,
pulleys, belts, chains, couplings, spindles, cams,
and gears in addition to connecting rods and
other machine components that transmit energy.
• Other moving parts – machine components
that move during machine operation such as
reciprocating, rotating, and transverse moving
parts as well as auxiliary machine parts.
What kinds of mechanical motion are
hazardous?
All mechanical motion is potentially hazardous. In
addition to in-running nip points (“pinch points”) –
which occur when two parts move together and at
least one moves in a rotary or circular motion that
gears, rollers, belt drives, and pulleys generate – the
following are the most common types of hazardous
mechanical motion:
• Rotating – circular movement of couplings,
cams, clutches, flywheels, and spindles as well
as shaft ends and rotating collars that may grip
clothing or otherwise force a body part into a
dangerous location.
• Reciprocating – back-and-forth or up-and-
down action that may strike or entrap a worker
between a moving part and a fixed object.
• Transversing – movement in a straight,
continuous line that may strike or catch a
worker in a pinch or shear point created
between the moving part and a fixed object.
• Cutting – action generated during sawing,
boring, drilling, milling, slicing, and slitting.
• Punching – motion resulting when a machine
moves a slide (ram) to stamp or blank metal or
other material.
• Shearing – movement of a powered slide or
knife during metal trimming or shearing.
• Bending – action occurring when power is
applied to a slide to draw or form metal or
other materials.
Are there any OSHA standards that cover
amputation hazards in the workplace?
Yes. The Occupational Safety and Health Adminis-
tration (OSHA) has the following standards in Title
29 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) to pro-
tect workers from amputations in the workplace:
• 29 CFR Part 1910 Subparts O and P cover
machinery and machine guarding.
• 29 CFR 1926 Subpart I covers hand tools and
powered tools.
• 29 CFR Part 1928 Subpart D covers agricultural
equipment.
• 29 CFR Part 1915 Subparts C, H, and J; 29 CFR
Part 1917 Subparts B, C, and G; and 29 CFR
Part 1918 Subparts F, G, and H cover maritime
operations.
What can employers do to help protect
workers from amputations?
You should be able to recognize, identify, manage,
and control amputation hazards commonly
found in the workplace such as those caused
Amputations
Amputations are some of the most serious and debilitating workplace injuries. They
are widespread and involve a variety of activities and equipment. Amputations occur
most often when workers operate unguarded or inadequately safeguarded mechanical
power presses, power press brakes, powered and non-powered conveyors, printing
presses, roll-forming and rollbending machines, food slicers, meat grinders, meat-
cutting band saws, drill presses, and milling machines as well as shears, grinders, and
slitters. These injuries also happen during materials handling activities and when using
forklifts and doors as well as trash compactors and powered and non-powered hand
tools. Besides normal operation, the following activities involving stationary machines
also expose workers to potential amputation hazards: setting up, threading, preparing,
adjusting, cleaning, lubricating, and maintaining machines as well as clearing jams.
FactSheet
DSG FS-3508 04/2012
by mechanical components of machinery, the
mechanical motion that occurs in or near these
components, and the activities that workers
perform during mechanical operation.
Work practices, employee training, and admin-
istrative controls can help prevent and control
amputation hazards. Machine safeguarding with
the following equipment is the best way to control
amputations caused by stationary machinery:
• Guards provide physical barriers that prevent
access to hazardous areas. They should be
secure and strong, and workers should not be
able to bypass, remove, or tamper with them.
Guards should not obstruct the operator’s view
or prevent employees from working.
• Devices help prevent contact with points of
operation and may replace or supplement
guards. Devices can interrupt the normal
cycle of the machine when the operator’s
hands are at the point of operation, prevent
the operator from reaching into the point of
operation, or withdraw the operator’s hands
if they approach the point of operation when
the machine cycles. They must allow safe
lubrication and maintenance and not create
hazards or interfere with normal machine
operation. In addition, they should be secure,
tamper-resistant, and durable.
You are responsible for safeguarding machines
and should consider this need when purchasing
machinery. New machinery is usually available with
safeguards installed by the manufacturer. You can
also purchase appropriate safeguards separately or
build them in-house.
Are certain jobs particularly hazardous
for some employees?
Yes. Under the Fair Labor Standards Act, the
Secretary of Labor has designated certain nonfarm
jobs as especially hazardous for employees
under the age of 18. These workers generally are
prohibited from operating band saws, circular saws,
guillotine shears, punching and shearing machines,
meatpacking or meat-processing machines, paper
products machines, woodworking machines, metal-
forming machines, and meat slicers.
Workers’ Rights
Workers have the right to:
• Working conditions that do not pose a risk of
serious harm.
• Receive information and training (in a language
and vocabulary the worker understands) about
workplace hazards, methods to prevent them,
and the OSHA standards that apply to their
workplace.
• Review records of work-related injuries
and illnesses.
• File a complaint asking OSHA to inspect
their workplace if they believe there is a
serious hazard or that their employer is not
following OSHA’s rules. OSHA will keep all
identities confidential.
• Exercise their rights under the law without
retaliation, including reporting an injury or
raising health and safety concerns with their
employer or OSHA. If a worker has been
retaliated against for using their rights, they
must file a complaint with OSHA as soon as
possible, but no later than 30 days.
For additional information, see OSHA’s Workers
page (www.osha.gov/workers).
How to Contact OSHA
Under the Occupational Safety and Health Act
of 1970, employers are responsible for providing
safe and healthful workplaces for their employees.
OSHA’s role is to help ensure these conditions for
America’s working men and women by setting
and enforcing standards, and providing training,
education and assistance. For more information,
visit www.osha.gov or call OSHA at 1-800-321-
OSHA (6742), TTY 1-877-889-5627.
This is one in a series of informational fact sheets highlighting OSHA programs, policies or
standards. It does not impose any new compliance requirements. For a comprehensive list of
compliance requirements of OSHA standards or regulations, refer to Title 29 of the Code of Federal
Regulations. This information will be made available to sensory-impaired individuals upon request.
The voice phone is (202) 693-1999; teletypewriter (TTY) number: (877) 889-5627.