Protecting Workers from the
Hazards of Asbestos-Containing
Flooring Material Maintenance
Many resilient flooring tiles contain asbestos, a mineral fiber used in numerous
building materials before its dangerous health effects were discovered. A hazard
exists for workers who buff or wax flooring material containing asbestos. Any
floor tiles installed prior to 1980 should be presumed to contain asbestos — unless
confirmed to be asbestos-free by a laboratory — and the proper protective actions
should be taken. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has
regulations to protect workers from asbestos.
What is the hazard?
The equipment used during the care or
maintenance of asbestos-containing flooring tiles
has an abrasive pad which runs at high speeds,
and can release tiny asbestos fibers into the air.
The airborne fibers can then be inhaled by
workers without knowing it, and become trapped
in their lungs.
Asbestos is a known human carcinogen and
can cause chronic lung disease as well as lung
and other cancers.
How do I know if there is a hazard?
Airborne asbestos fibers are very small and
cannot be seen by the naked eye.
Flooring materials installed prior to 1980 should
be presumed to contain asbestos and should be
treated as such, unless a piece of the material is
sent to a reputable laboratory and analyzed for
asbestos by transmission electron microscopy and
found to contain a concentration of less than 1.0%.
What should be done to protect workers?
Workers caring for asbestos-containing
flooring material (general industry) are
protected by OSHA’s Asbestos standard,
29 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part
1910.1001. OSHA has separate asbestos
standards for the construction and shipyard
industries due to differing working conditions
and asbestos exposures.
Training elements of OSHA’s
Asbestos Standard
Initial and annual training must be provided
in a manner and language that workers can
understand. The training must include: health
effects of asbestos; locations of asbestos-
containing and presumed asbestos-containing
materials; recognition of damage and deterioration
of asbestos-containing materials; and the proper
response to fiber release episodes. The following
elements should be included in this training:
Care of Asbestos-Containing Flooring Materials
• Do not sand asbestos-containing flooring
material;
• Use only low-abrasion buffing pads;
• Operate buffers only at speeds lower than
300 rpm;
• Use wet methods;
• If asbestos-containing flooring material has
sufficient finish, brushing or dry buffing is
permissible.
If these methods are properly implemented,
personal protective equipment (PPE) should not
be necessary.
Recordkeeping
A record of training and worker notification
is necessary. If applicable, any exposure
monitoring records and medical monitoring
records must also be kept.
FactSheet
DTSEM FS-3693 11/2013
Workers’ Rights
Workers have the right to:
• Working conditions that do not pose a risk of
serious harm.
• Receive information and training (in a
language and vocabulary the worker
understands) about workplace hazards,
methods to prevent them, and the OSHA
standards that apply to their workplace.
• Review records of work-related injuries and
illnesses.
• File a complaint asking OSHA to inspect their
workplace if they believe there is a serious hazard
or that their employer is not following OSHA’s
rules. OSHA will keep all identities confidential.
• Exercise their rights under the law without
retaliation, including reporting an injury or
raising health and safety concerns with their
employer or OSHA. If a worker has been
retaliated against for using their rights, they
must file a complaint with OSHA as soon as
possible, but no later than 30 days.
For additional information see OSHA’s Workers
page (www.osha.gov/workers).
How to Contact OSHA
Under the Occupational Safety and Health
Act of 1970, employers are responsible for
providing safe and healthful workplaces for
their employees. OSHA’s role is to ensure these
conditions for America’s workers by setting and
enforcing standards, and providing training,
education and assistance. For more information,
visit www.osha.gov or call OSHA at 1-800-321-
OSHA (6742), TTY 1-877-889-5627.
This is one in a series of informational fact sheets highlighting OSHA programs, policies or standards.
It does not impose any new compliance requirements. For a comprehensive list of compliance
requirements of OSHA standards or regulations, refer to Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
This information will be made available to sensory-impaired individuals upon request. The voice
phone is (202) 693-1999; teletypewriter (TTY) number: (877) 889-5627.