U.S. Department of Labor t www.osha.gov t (800) 321-OSHA (6742)Agricultural Safety
Fact Sheet
Emergency Preparedness for Farmworkers
Farms, like most workplaces, face unexpected emergencies and disasters. Agricultural
emergencies and disasters can be natural or man-made. To help lessen the impact of these
events, employers and supervisors should develop and exercise an emergency action plan that
prepares workers to react to and handle emergencies and disasters before they occur.
What is an Emergency Action
Plan (EAP)?
An emergency action plan identifies and organizes employer and
worker responsibilities in preparation for and when responding to a
workplace emergency or disaster. Having a plan with the employer’s
support and commitment and workers’ participation is key to an
orderly evacuation and quick response. Developing and implementing
an EAP can lessen confusion, decrease injuries, and limit destruction
of property during and after a disaster or other emergency.
Agricultural Emergencies
Natural:
• tornadoes
• hurricanes
• wildfires
• floods
• severe winter storms
• severe dust storms
• lightning strikes
• earthquakes
Man-made:
• wildfires
• explosions or fires
• animal handling incidents
• grain entrapments
• power failures
• rotating and moving
equipment incidents
(Power take-off shafts,
screw conveyors/augers)
• chemical releases or spills
• amputations
• vehicle incidents (turnovers,
rollovers)
• workplace violence
• accidental poisoning
How to Prepare an Emergency
Action Plan
A well-documented EAP should ensure that emergency response
procedures are established for before, during, and after an
emergency. The plan should be broad enough to address all types
of emergencies or disasters that could possibly occur on the farm.
For smaller organizations, the EAP does not need to be written
and may be communicated orally. Nevertheless, it is always a
good practice to have a written emergency action plan. The best
EAPs are customized for your specific farm operations and require
time, thought and planning. Include workers and family members
in the emergency preparedness planning process to help identify
emergency or disaster situations that can impact the farm. The EAP
should be revised once shortcomings have become known, and
reviewed at least annually. The employer should review the EAP
with each worker when:
• A new worker is hired
• The plan is developed
• The worker’s workplace
responsibilities or designated
actions under the plan change.
At a minimum, the EAP should include:
• Emergency escape procedures and routes.
• Procedures to account for workers.
• Procedures for workers who remain on site after the alarm sounds.
• Duties for workers designated to perform rescue and
medical functions.
• The preferred means for reporting emergencies.
• Contact(s) for further information or explanation of duties under
the plan.
U.S. Department of Labor t www.osha.gov t (800) 321-OSHA (6742)• Possible emergency events, incidents and life-threating situations.
• Emergency escape routes, shelter-in-place locations, and
rally points.
• Floor plans and workplace maps.
• A chain of command to prevent confusion and to coordinate
the work.
• Emergency communication equipment, such as two-way
radios or a public address system for workers and first
responder notification.
• Special equipment needed for emergencies and disaster response.
• Workers’ next-of-kin emergency phone numbers and contacts.
• Farm inventory that includes location of livestock, electrical
shut-off locations, buildings and structures, and farm
machinery/equipment makes and model numbers.
• Needed supplies, such as sandbags, fire extinguishers, gas-
powered generators and hand tools.
• If needed, location of primary and secondary areas to relocate
farm assets and workers.
• Location of buildings in the vicinity that can be used as a
command post or logistical assistance area.
The employer should make workers aware of the po-
tential man-made and natural workplace emergency
situations that could have an impact on the farm.
Preplanning with First Responders
Implementing and exercising an emergency action plan should
involve working with your local first responders or fire department.
Invite them to walk your farm to gather and record important
information that could be critical for making life-saving decisions
at an incident, such as a grain bin entrapment, fire or natural
disaster. Pre-planning allows first responders to become familiar
with the following:
• Farm’s physical layout, including buildings and other structures.
(e.g., grain bins)
• Hazardous chemicals (e.g., pesticides, anhydrous ammonia)
and equipment (e.g., augers, PTOs).
• Locations where employees would be if an emergency
occurred; important contacts, including daytime and nighttime
contact Information.
• How utilities (e.g., electric, gas and water) can be controlled.
• Evacuation plans, security, etc.
• Emergency first responder limitations.
Training
Worker training may vary from operation to operation. Some
employers set up formal classroom-style training for workers and
others work one-on-one with workers. If workers are expected
to perform adequately in an emergency, provision must be made
for the training of both individuals and teams. Regardless of the
training approach, worker training is an important part of a good
emergency preparedness plan. Training should be conducted
periodically or as needed to maintain workplace preparedness.
In addition, training and training materials should be provided
to workers in a language that they understand, because some
workers may not speak English.
Workers should be trained in the
following areas:
• Evacuation plans
• Alarm systems
• Reporting procedures for
personnel
• Shutdown procedures
• Types of potential
emergencies
Farm Exercises and Drills
Unless the plan is tested, it is difficult to predict all of the problems
that may happen. Exercises and drills are excellent tools to minimize
these potential problems. Nevertheless, exercises and drills should
be conducted annually or as needed to practice all or critical
portions (such as evacuation) of the emergency response plan.
After each drill, exercise, or emergency incident, a meeting
or review should be held to evaluate what happened, why it
happened, and how it can be done better by the employer and
worker(s) in the future. Furthermore, post exercise and drill
meetings or reviews will identify areas that require improvements.
Medical Service and First Aid
At least one person or persons, in the absence of an infirmary, clinic,
or hospital in near proximity to the workplace, should be adequately
trained to render first aid. It is also essential that basic first-aid
supplies are available. Emergency phone numbers should be posted
in visible places, inside farm vehicles, and on telephones.
For more information on first aid, see OSHA’s
Best Practices
Guide: Fundamentals of a Workplace First-Aid Program at
www.osha.gov/Publications/OSHA3317first-aid.pdf.
U.S. Department of Labor t www.osha.gov t (800) 321-OSHA (6742)Workplace Emergency Response Team
A farm’s most valuable asset during the first few minutes of an
emergency is a well-trained and disciplined emergency response
team. A farm emergency response may be provided by an outside
organization, such as the fire department or in some cases, the
farm’s internal emergency response team. Workers who are
members of the emergency response team should be thoroughly
trained and physically capable of performing emergency response
duties and responsibilities. They should also be knowledgeable
about the hazards found on the farm.
Team members should know when to take actions themselves or
to wait on outside assistance when an emergency or disaster is
too large to handle (i.e., the fire department).
One or more members on the team should be trained in:
• How and when to use various types of fire extinguishers
• First aid, including cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
• Shutdown procedures
• Chemical spill control procedures
• Emergency rescue procedures
Contractors
Employers should alert contractors about the hazards found in the
workplace, particularly regarding the work they are to perform.
In any emergency situation, contractors should be able to take
appropriate action as part of the EAP.
Photo: iStock
Workers’ Rights
Workers have the right to:
• Working conditions that do not pose a risk of serious harm.
• Receive information and training (in a language and vocabulary
the worker understands) about workplace hazards, methods
to prevent them, and the OSHA standards that apply to their
workplace. Review records of work-related injuries and illnesses.
• File a complaint asking OSHA to inspect their workplace if they
believe there is a serious hazard or that their employer is not
following OSHA’s rules. OSHA will keep all identities confidential.
• Exercise their rights under the law without retaliation, including
reporting an injury or raising health and safety concerns with
their employer or OSHA. If a worker has been retaliated against
for using their rights, they must file a complaint with OSHA as
soon as possible, but no later than 30 days.
For additional information, see OSHA’s Workers page.
For questions or to get information or advice, to report an emergency, fatality, inpatient hospitalization, amputation,
or loss of an eye, to file a confidential complaint, or to request OSHA’s free on-site consultation service, contact your
nearest OSHA office, visit www.osha.gov, or call OSHA at 1-800-321-OSHA (6742), TTY 1-877-889-5627.
For more information on ATV safety and other issues affecting farmworkers, visit OSHA’s Safety and
Health Topics Agricultural Operations website at www.osha.gov/dsg/topics/agriculturaloperations.
This is one in a series of informational fact sheets highlighting OSHA programs, policies or standards. It does not impose any
new compliance requirements. For a comprehensive list of compliance requirements of OSHA standards or regulations, refer to
Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations. This information will be made available to sensory-impaired individuals upon request.
The voice phone is (202) 693-1999; teletypewriter (TTY) number: (877) 889-5627.
DSG FS-3870 06/2016