U.S. Department of Labor t www.osha.gov t (800) 321-OSHA (6742)Agricultural Safety
Fact Sheet
Preventing Farm Vehicle Backover Incidents
Backing up farm equipment and vehicles is a daily occurrence in the agricultural industry.
Backover incidents occur when a backing vehicle strikes a worker who is standing, walking, or
kneeling behind that vehicle. These incidents can be prevented. Backover incidents can result
in serious injuries or deaths to farmworkers. Employers are responsible for maintaining a safe
workplace for every worker. This fact sheet provides employers with information about backover
hazards and safety measures.
Preventing or Minimizing
Backover Hazards
Most backover incidents are due to the employer’s failure to train
vehicle operators and enforce proper backing up techniques and
preventive safety measures. Employers should ensure that
unnecessary backing up is avoided. In addition, employers should also
ensure that both the operator and other workers are always aware of
their surroundings. Moreover, employers should develop and require
the use of alternate travel routes and backover safety systems, which
are effective safeguards to prevent backover incidents.
Hitching Farm Equipment and
Implements
Helpers often assist operators in backing up and hitching farm
vehicles (e.g., truck or tractor). However, helpers working behind
these vehicles risk becoming caught and crushed between the
vehicle and the equipment being hitched. Employers should require
the use of the following hitching and backing up safety measures.
Hitching operations without a helper:
• Inspect the equipment, including the hydraulic and electrical
connections, drawbar hole and hitch pin, and the three-point hitch.
• Ensure that no one is standing or working behind the vehicle.
• If available, use the vehicle backup camera and alarm to ensure
that objects are not in the vehicle’s path.
• Back up the vehicle slowly to align the hole in the drawbar with
the hole in the implement hitch.
• Stop and put the vehicle in park, or lock the brakes.
• If required, dismount to connect the electrical and hydraulic
connections and safety chains.
• Hitch the equipment to the vehicle.
• Release the parking brake/lock, place the vehicle in gear and
slowly drive away.
Hitching operations with a helper:
• Inspect the equipment, including the hydraulic and electrical
connections, drawbar hole and hitch pin, and the three-point
hitch connection if applicable.
• Ensure that coordinated ASABE hand signals are understood
and used (see below for coordinated hand signals).
• Back up the vehicle at the slowest speed possible toward
the equipment.
• Until the vehicle is stopped, the helper should stand outside the
path of the vehicle.
Farmworkers on foot are at risk of being backed over by a farm vehicle.
U.S. Department of Labor t www.osha.gov t (800) 321-OSHA (6742)• After the drawbar and equipment are aligned, stop and put the
vehicle in park, or lock the brakes.
• Signal the helper that it is safe to approach the vehicle for a
close inspection and to prepare for hitching operations.
• If required, attach the electrical and hydraulic connections and
safety chains. Move the vehicle forward or backward a few
inches, if needed, to allow the helper to drop in the hitch pin.
To prevent backover incidents,
employers should:
• Regularly assess each work location to determine if a traffic
control plan is needed.
• Establish drive-through or circular turnaround areas. If this is
not possible, provide adequate space for operators to perform
a three-point turn.
• Ensure that all turnaround areas are level, firm, and well-
drained to prevent vehicles from tipping over.
• Determine if a backup camera or system is needed.
• Never allow workers to eat lunch or rest near active working
vehicles and equipment.
• Identify where workers might stand or walk unexpectedly.
• Determine if a spotter is required.
• Instruct workers and operators not to use personal mobile
phones, headphones or any items that could create a distraction.
A circular turnaround area is the safest way to allow safe entry and
exit of farm equipment and vehicles.
Working Conditions
Working at night
The lack of light can increase the operator’s blind spots, as well
as impair his or her ability to see other workers. Employers should
provide sufficient lighting for the worksite and vehicle, and require
workers to wear reflectors or high-visibility vests to make them
more visible.
Working in bad weather
Bad weather, such as heavy rain, can pose particular hazards
to workers and operators. Strong rain can reduce the operator’s
visibility and make it very difficult to recognize workers and other
vehicles that may be nearby. If the workers are at risk due to bad
weather, employers should stop the work and ensure that the
workers stay clear of moving vehicles until it is safe to return.
Training
Employers should train vehicle operators to:
• Become familiar with backing up hazards and worksite
safety measures.
• Back up only when necessary and for as short a distance
as possible.
• Check the surrounding area for obstacles, other workers,
and equipment.
• Understand the limitations of their vehicles and equipment,
and operate them only in the way they were intended to be
operated.
• Keep mirrors clean and adjusted properly to minimize blind spots.
• Know the vehicle’s blind spots — mirrors never give the
entire view.
• Check that backup alarms, sensors, and cameras are
functioning properly.
• Look under vehicles and trailers for workers; remember
that some workers may not respond to verbal or mechanical
warnings.
• Honk the vehicle’s horn and turn on the 4-way flashers, if
necessary when backing up.
• Roll down cab windows, and if necessary, open the vehicle’s
doors so that a person shouting can be heard.
• Understand that snow, mud, slush, or ice may prevent sudden
stops and cause the vehicle to move in an unexpected manner.
• Understand that bad weather may compromise the operator’s
ability to hear or see warnings.
• Always back up at a slow speed and watch carefully in
all directions.
U.S. Department of Labor t www.osha.gov t (800) 321-OSHA (6742)Employers should train farmworkers on foot to:
• Stand where they can see the vehicle’s mirrors whenever possible.
• Never go between a moving vehicle and any equipment that is
hitched or being towed.
• Never stand or linger in a vehicle’s path.
• Never rest or sleep next to or under an agricultural work vehicle
or equipment.
• Inform other workers when vehicles are approaching.
• Listen for the vehicle’s backup alarm and watch the
vehicle’s movement.
• Never assume that the vehicle’s operator can see them.
• Never wear earbuds or headphones when working near farm
vehicles and equipment.
Using Hand Signals and Spotters
Distance and noise can make voice commands very difficult to
hear or understand in some agricultural locations. Agricultural hand
signals have been developed for farm machinery operators by the
American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers (ASABE/
E19). Hand signals can prevent accidents and save time. Learning
American Society of Agricultural and Biological
Engineers (ASABE/E19) Hand Signals
Start the engine. Move
arm in a circle at waist
level as though you were
cranking an engine.
Stop the engine. Move
your right arm across your
neck from left to right in a
“throat-cutting” motion.
Come to me — may mean
“Come help me” in an
emergency. Raise arm
vertically overhead, palm to
the front, and rotate in large
horizontal circles.
Move toward me —
follow me. Look toward person
or vehicle you want moved.
Hold one hand in front of you,
palm facing you, and move your
forearm back and forth.
Move out — take off.
Face desired direction of
movement. Extend arm
straight out behind you, then
swing it overhead and forward
until it’s straight out in front of
you with palm down.
Speed it up — increase
speed. Raise hand to left
shoulder, fist closed. Thrust
fist upward to full extent of
arm and back to shoulder
rapidly several times.
Slow it down — decrease
speed. Extend arm horizontally
at your side, palm down, and
wave arm downward (45
degrees minimum) several times,
keeping arm straight. Don’t
move arm above horizontal.
Raise equipment. Point
upward with forefinger
while making a circle at
head level with your hand.
Lower equipment. Point
toward the ground with forefinger
of one hand while moving the
hand in circular motion.
This far to go. Put hands
in front of face, palms facing
each other. Move hands
together or farther apart to
indicate how far to go.
Stop. Raise hand upward,
arm fully extended, palm to the
front. Hold that position until
the signal is understood.
Images courtesy of American Society of
Agricultural and Biological Engineers
U.S. Department of Labor t www.osha.gov t (800) 321-OSHA (6742)hand signals will give workers and drivers an easy and effective
way to communicate. Employers should train and require drivers
and spotters to use the ASABE’s hand signals in all agricultural
operations, especially when noise or distance is a factor.
Vehicle Safety Devices and
Warning Systems
Many safety devices and warning systems, including backup
alarms, large backup lights, sensors, alarms that beep
continuously while the vehicle is in reverse, and rear-view
cameras, have come on the market and are now essential
components of modern day farm vehicles. Older agricultural farm
vehicles may lack these safety devices and systems. Planning
ahead, establishing sound safety procedures, and adding safety
warning devices to farm vehicles can help prevent backover
incidents and injuries.
Workers’ Rights
Workers have the right to:
• Working conditions that do not pose a risk of serious harm.
• Receive information and training (in a language and vocabulary
the worker understands) about workplace hazards, methods
to prevent them, and the OSHA standards that apply to their
workplace. Review records of work-related injuries and
illnesses.
• File a complaint asking OSHA to inspect their workplace if
they believe there is a serious hazard or that their employer
is not following OSHA’s rules. OSHA will keep all identities
confidential.
• Exercise their rights under the law without retaliation, including
reporting an injury or raising health and safety concerns with
their employer or OSHA. If a worker has been retaliated against
for using their rights, they must file a complaint with OSHA as
soon as possible, but no later than 30 days.
For additional information, see OSHA’s Workers page.
For questions or to get information or advice, to report an emergency, fatality, inpatient hospitalization, amputation,
or loss of an eye, to file a confidential complaint, or to request OSHA’s free on-site consultation service, contact your
nearest OSHA office, visit www.osha.gov, or call OSHA at 1-800-321-OSHA (6742), TTY 1-877-889-5627.
For more information on ATV safety and other issues affecting farmworkers, visit OSHA’s Safety and
Health Topics Agricultural Operations website at www.osha.gov/dsg/topics/agriculturaloperations.
This is one in a series of informational fact sheets highlighting OSHA programs, policies or standards. It does not impose any
new compliance requirements. For a comprehensive list of compliance requirements of OSHA standards or regulations, refer to
Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations. This information will be made available to sensory-impaired individuals upon request.
The voice phone is (202) 693-1999; teletypewriter (TTY) number: (877) 889-5627.
DSG FS-3840 12/2015