Agricultural Safety
Fact Sheet
Safe Use of Tripod Orchard Ladders
Every year many workers are injured from using tripod orchard ladders. These incidents are
preventable. Workers, such as fruit pickers and landscapers, use this type of ladder regularly.
Employers can prevent worker falls and injuries by following the safety measures described in
this fact sheet.
A tripod orchard ladder is a portable, self-supporting
ladder used in orchards and landscape maintenance, for
tasks such as pruning and fruit harvesting. This type of
ladder should not be used as an all-purpose ladder. They
are designed with a flared base and a tripod pole that
provides support on soft, uneven ground. In addition, these ladders
have no spreader bar or locking mechanisms to hold its front
in place or to stabilize the ladder. For a tripod orchard ladder to
function properly and remain stable, the ladder side rails and tripod
pole must slightly penetrate the ground.
Tripod Orchard Ladder Injuries
and Hazards
Sprains and strains are the most common types of ladder
injuries and are caused by overreaching, moving, lifting
or carrying ladders. Fractures, concussions and dislocations are
caused by falls as a result of an unstable ladder, overextension of
the ladder’s tripod pole, slipping or being struck by a falling ladder.
In addition, poor weather conditions such as high winds or ladders
too close to electrical lines have also caused fatalities. Back injuries
can also occur from carrying the ladder incorrectly for long periods
of time and over long distances.
Fall Prevention
When working on a ladder, falls are the most common
hazard. More falls occur on the upper part of the ladder
than in the middle or lower portions. Most falls are due to slippery
steps, unstable ladders, and by not maintaining proper contact with
the ladder. Employers can prevent most tripod ladder fall hazards
by training workers and taking the following safety measures:
• Place the ladder firmly in the ground to keep it from
collapsing, slipping, moving, or falling. Make sure that the
ladder is not positioned over a soft spot or hole.
• Ladders placed on sloped ground must have the tripod pole
positioned uphill.
• Routinely inspect ladders.
• Train workers to center themselves between the ladder’s side
rails and to use both hands to climb up and down the ladder.
• Select and provide required personal protective equipment
(such as eye protection) for workers.
• Have workers wear non-slip shoes with stiff soles and a good
sized heel.
U.S. Department of Labor t www.osha.gov t (800) 321-OSHA (6742)
Top Cap
Tripod Pole
Safe Working
Load Label
Side
Rails
Foot Plates
Rungs
U.S. Department of Labor t www.osha.gov t (800) 321-OSHA (6742)
• Train workers not to overreach beyond the ladder’s side
rails; the ladder should be moved to perform orchard work.
• Do not overfill produce bags.
• Do not stand or work on the ladder’s top three steps.
• Train workers to never move from a ladder onto a tree
branch or to stand on or use the branch for balance.
General Safety Precautions
Before work begins, hazards should be identified and
eliminated by the employer. Some safeguards employers
should implement include:
• Mark dangerous areas for workers to avoid, such as trees
and electrical lines.
• Establish and enforce ladder safety rules.
• Ensure that only one worker is on each ladder.
• Do not allow other types of ladders to be used.
• Conduct daily safety talks.
• Select and use ladders appropriate for the worker and
tree size.
Carrying, Lifting and
Moving Ladders
Workers carry, lift and move ladders throughout the
workday. To prevent injuries from carrying, lifting
and moving ladders, employers should train workers to properly
handle one ladder at a time. Employers should also train workers
on the following:
• To place their arm through the ladder and to balance it on
their shoulder.
• To carry ladders in a horizontal position with the top of the
ladder facing forward, firmly securing the tripod pole to keep it
from slipping out of the ladder notch.
• For moving long distances, the horizontal (side-to-side)
position is especially useful in carrying ladders, either by one
or two workers.
• To watch for other people and nearby trees.
Proper ladder lifting and handling techniques can protect workers
from back injuries, as well as ease the work. Throughout the
workday, employers should remind workers of the proper lifting
and handling techniques.
Training
Employers should train full-time and seasonal workers
to recognize hazards and set up a process for
workers to report unsafe conditions to supervisors immediately.
Ladder safety training should be conducted by an experienced/
knowledgeable person. Training should include ladder
maintenance and storage, and how to properly respond to ladder
injuries and incidents.
Employers should train workers to:
• Never leave a ladder standing open at the end of the workday
• Limit or reschedule work on ladders during high winds,
heavy rain, or thunderstorms.
• Avoid walking under or near ladders in use by using a
barrier or having a coworker act as a lookout.
• Never use ladders on hard surfaces.
• Use and carry tools on a ladder in a safe manner.
Inspecting, Maintaining and
Storing Ladders
Before a ladder is used, the employer must
inspect it to ensure that it has no defects and that
it is in good working condition. Employers should focus on:
• Checking ladders daily in accord with the manufacturer’s
guidelines to ensure components are in good working order.
• Checking ladders for missing, loose, or sheared rivets, broken
steps, and bent rails or tripod poles. After a ladder tips over,
inspect it from top to bottom before placing it back in service.
Ladder safety training should be provided before any worker is
allowed to work on a tripod orchard ladder.
This is one in a series of informational fact sheets highlighting OSHA programs, policies or standards. It does not impose any
new compliance requirements. For a comprehensive list of compliance requirements of OSHA standards or regulations, refer to
Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations. This information will be made available to sensory-impaired individuals upon request.
The voice phone is (202) 693-1999; teletypewriter (TTY) number: (877) 889-5627.
U.S. Department of Labor t www.osha.gov t (800) 321-OSHA (6742)
• File a complaint asking OSHA to inspect their workplace if
they believe there is a serious hazard or that their employer
is not following OSHA’s rules. OSHA will keep all identities
confidential.
• Exercise their rights under the law without retaliation,
including reporting an injury or raising health and safety
concerns with their employer or OSHA. If a worker has
been retaliated against for using their rights, they must file
a complaint with OSHA as soon as possible, but no later
than 30 days.
For more information, see OSHA’s Workers page.
Tripod Orchard Ladder Safety
Checklist
o Rivets/joints and fastenings are in place and secure.
o Steps are in place and secure.
o Steps are free of dents, bends, and damage.
o Free of rust, grease or oil.
o Safe Working Load label is attached to the ladder’s side rails.
o Top cap is tightly secured to the ladder’s side rails and
tripod leg hinge.
o Tripod leg is intact and not able to bend.
o Tripod leg is free of cracks and dents.
o Footplate is free of cracks and rust.
• Removing defective or damaged ladders from service
immediately. Placing an “out-of service” tag on damaged
ladders, and separating them from non-damaged ladders.
Repairing damaged ladders must not be done by the worker.
• Storing ladders in accord with the manufacturer’s
instructions and away from excessive heat and cold.
Emergency Response
Procedures
Employers should develop an emergency response
plan that is tailored to their facility and operations. This includes
training workers to call 911 and to not move an injured worker
suspected of having a neck or spinal injury. Also, first-aid and CPR
training should be provided to workers by their employer.
Prior to use, workers should be trained on how to use a ladder
safety checklist. The following checklist identifies inspection
requirements (not all-inclusive) that can be applied to a tripod
orchard ladder safety program.
Workers’ Rights
Workers have the right to:
• Working conditions that do not pose a risk of serious harm.
• Receive information and training (in a language and
vocabulary the worker understands) about workplace
hazards, methods to prevent them, and the OSHA standards
that apply to their workplace.
• Review records of work-related injuries and illnesses.
For questions or to get information or advice, to report an emergency, fatality, inpatient hospitalization, amputation,
or loss of an eye, to file a confidential complaint, or to request OSHA’s free on-site consultation service, contact
your nearest OSHA office, visit www.osha.gov, or call OSHA at 1-800-321-OSHA (6742), TTY 1-877-889-5627.
For more information on ATV safety and other issues affecting farmworkers, visit OSHA’s Safety and
Health Topics Agricultural Operations website at www.osha.gov/dsg/topics/agriculturaloperations.
DSG FS-3728 06/2014