U.S. Department of Labor t www.osha.gov t (800) 321-OSHA (6742)Agricultural Safety
Fact Sheet
Protecting Agricultural Workers from
Tractor Hazards
Most farmworker injuries and deaths are caused by tractor incidents such as overturns,
runovers, power take-off (PTO) systems, and unintended contact with tractor attachments or
implements. Employers are responsible for ensuring a safe work environment for every worker.
This fact sheet provides employers with information about these tractor hazards, along with
safety measures to protect tractor operators.
Overturns
Tractor overturns are the leading cause of fatalities
in the agriculture industry, resulting in approximately
130 deaths per year. The majority of tractor overturn
incidents take place when these farm vehicles turn on their side or
tip over backward. These overturns come about very quickly, often
in seconds, which leaves the operator little or no chance to get
clear as the tractor tips or rolls.
When operated properly, tractors are generally quite safe. Tractors
that are old, in poor condition, lack safety guards and devices, or are
driven in an irregular or risky manner can contribute significantly to
unsafe or hazardous conditions.
Roll-over Protective
Structures (ROPS)
An operator’s chances of surviving a tractor overturn
without a serious injury are very good if the tractor has a ROPS
and the operator is wearing a seat belt. A ROPS is a roll bar or
cage frame that is designed to form a zone of protection around
the operator if a tractor overturns. To prevent being thrown from a
tractor, operators must wear a seat belt.
A qualified dealer can retrofit older tractor models with a ROPS/
seat belt system. The National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health (NIOSH) Division of Safety Research and Protective
Technology Branch has developed a Cost-Effective Rollover
Protective Structure Program (CROPS) for four tractor models that
lack commercially available ROPS.
ROPS and Seatbelt
Requirements
• Agricultural tractors with over 20 horsepower
manufactured after October 25, 1976 are required
to have ROPs. (1928.51(b)(1)).
• Each tractor with a ROPS must have a seat belt.
• Ensure that each operator uses a seat belt properly.
• Employers must ensure that each operator tightens their seat
belt so that they are confined within the ROPS protective area.A roll-over protective structure and a seat belt can protect workers
from being crushed by an overturned tractor.
U.S. Department of Labor t www.osha.gov t (800) 321-OSHA (6742)Employers must ensure that tractor operators receive initial and
at least annual training on the safe operating practices described
below (29 CFR 1928.51(d)):
• Fasten seat belts securely (for tractors with rollover protection).
• Where possible, avoid operating the tractor near ditches,
embankments and holes.
• Stay off slopes too steep for safe operation.
• Reduce speed when turning or crossing slopes, and on rough,
slick, or muddy surfaces.
• Operate the tractor smoothly, without jerky turns, starts, or stops.
• Be attentive, especially at row ends, on roads, and around trees.
Power Take-Off (PTO) Shafts
A PTO allows farmworkers to use power from the tractor’s engine
to drive a variety of machines and implements. PTOs are useful,
but they can pose a serious safety hazard. Operators and workers
have come into contact with unprotected as well as protected
PTOs. Employers must protect workers from coming into contact
with hazards created by a rotating PTO, and they must inspect
the PTO shaft to ensure that the PTO guard is always in place.
Employers should replace any missing or damaged PTO guard.
At the time of initial assignment and at least annually thereafter, the
employer should train every farmworker in the safe operation and
servicing of all equipment with which the operator will be involved,
including the following safe operating practices (1928.57(a)(6)(i):
• All PTOs, including rear, mid- or side-mounted shafts, shall
be guarded either by a master shield, or by other protective
guarding (1928.57(b)(1)(i)).
• Before servicing, adjusting, cleaning, or unclogging
the equipment, stop the engine, disconnect the power
source, and wait for the PTO shaft to stop, except when
the machine must be running to be properly serviced or
maintained. In that case, the employer must train workers
on all steps and procedures needed to safely service or
maintain the equipment (1928.57(a)(6)(iii)).
• Keep all guards in place when the machine is in operation
(1928.57(a)(6)(i)).
• Ensure that everyone nearby is clear of the machine before
starting the tractor’s engine and engaging the PTO shaft’s
selector switch (1928.57(b)(6)(iv)). Tie back and tuck in long
hair and do not wear loose clothing. A rotating PTO shaft
can catch long hair or loose clothing.
• If possible, avoid working alone around PTO-driven machinery.
If entanglement occurs, a coworker may be able to stop the
PTO shaft in time to prevent more serious injury, or death.
Tractor Operator Training
Employer-provided tractor operator training can aid
in reducing tractor incidents. Employers should train
tractor operators to:
• Comply with the tractor’s operating instructions.
• Allow no riders, unless the tractor is manufactured with a
seat and a seat belt for each rider.
• Hitch only to the draw bar and hitch points.
• Set the brakes and hand brake, if available, when the tractor
is stopped for more than a few seconds.
• Ensure that operators have the experience and knowledge
to operate the tractor.
Emergency Planning and
Preparedness
Many injuries in agriculture occur far from hospitals
and emergency medical facilities. Moreover, most
employers do not have the training or capability to treat these
injuries. Because treatment facilities are not typically located
within a reasonable distance or timeframe, employers should:
• Develop an emergency action plan that addresses all
likely hazards.
• Designate an emergency staging area for the field or the office.
• Train tractor operators on how to respond to emergency
situations.
• Ensure that each tractor has a first-aid kit and a working
fire extinguisher.
• Assemble a first-aid kit that is designed to address
agricultural injuries and incidents. Agricultural first-aid kits
should contain basic medical items such as gauze, splints,
ice packs, surgical tape, disposable gloves, eye patches,
burn dressings and a first-aid instruction booklet.
In 34 states, SMV emblems must be displayed on the rear of any
tractor and its towed attachment traveling 25 mph or slower.
U.S. Department of Labor t www.osha.gov t (800) 321-OSHA (6742)• Call local first responders or 911 in case of an emergency.
When reporting an emergency, provide your name, location,
the nature of the emergency and where the worker(s) can
be reached.
• Maintain frequent communication with tractor operators
who work alone or in remote areas.
Workers’ Rights
Workers have the right to:
• Working conditions that do not pose a risk of
serious harm.
• Receive information and training (in a language and
vocabulary the worker understands) about workplace
hazards, methods to prevent them, and the OSHA
standards that apply to their workplace.
• Review records of work-related injuries and illnesses.
• File a complaint asking OSHA to inspect their workplace
if they believe there is a serious hazard or that their
employer is not following OSHA’s rules. OSHA will keep all
identities confidential.
• Exercise their rights under the law without retaliation, including
reporting an injury or raising health and safety concerns
with their employer or OSHA. If a worker has been retaliated
against for using their rights, they must file a complaint with
OSHA as soon as possible, but no later than 30 days.
For additional information, see OSHA’s Workers page.
General Safety Precautions
• Inspections and review: Ensure that operators and
workers are thoroughly familiar with farm machinery that
may be used for just a few days out of the year. This is
especially important with harvesting equipment such as
combines and cotton harvesters.
• Safety checks: Conduct preoperational safety checks, review
proper operating procedures and ensure that tractor safety
decals and stickers are not worn, damaged or removed.
• Be aware: Ensure that operators are familiar with the
ground where the tractor will be used. Operators should be
aware of ditches, uneven ground, and bystanders in the area.
• Children: Keep children away from tractors and their
implements. Having children on a tractor is unsafe.
• Indoor safety precautions: Prevent indoor carbon
monoxide buildup by ensuring that adequate ventilation is
always available when starting or operating a tractor indoors.
Make sure that exhaust fans are running if available, and
always leave the structure’s doors open if exhaust fans are
not available.
• Highway safety: Employers should train tractor operators to
avoid highways during busy peak travel times or poor visibility,
and at night or during bad weather. Lighting and markings for
tractors and towed equipment should be up-to-date and in
accord with transportation regulations. Tractor operators should
consider using emergency flashers and an escort vehicle to
increase the tractor’s visibility. The tractor should have a clean,
highly visible, unfaded slow-moving vehicle (SMV) emblem
affixed to the rear. SMV emblems are required in 34 states,
and they must be displayed on the rear of any tractor and
its towed attachment traveling 25 mph or slower. Employers
should check state highway regulations to determine if a SMV
emblem is required in their state or local jurisdiction.
For questions or to get information or advice, to report an emergency, fatality, inpatient hospitalization, amputation,
or loss of an eye, to file a confidential complaint, or to request OSHA’s free on-site consultation service, contact your
nearest OSHA office, visit www.osha.gov, or call OSHA at 1-800-321-OSHA (6742), TTY 1-877-889-5627.
For more information on ATV safety and other issues affecting farmworkers, visit OSHA’s Safety and
Health Topics Agricultural Operations website at www.osha.gov/dsg/topics/agriculturaloperations.
This is one in a series of informational fact sheets highlighting OSHA programs, policies or standards. It does not impose any
new compliance requirements. For a comprehensive list of compliance requirements of OSHA standards or regulations, refer to
Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations. This information will be made available to sensory-impaired individuals upon request.
The voice phone is (202) 693-1999; teletypewriter (TTY) number: (877) 889-5627.
DSG FS-3835 10/2015